So now that we've
talked about how
to program with
Java futures, let's
evaluate the pros and
cons of Java futures.
And the reason for
doing this, of course,
is not just to tell you
how crappy futures are
but really to motivate why
we need completable futures,
because they're
going to work around
all the limitations we identify
with classic Java futures.
But first before we start
casting shade at futures,
let's talk about some
good things about them.
One thing that you can
do with Java futures
is you may be able to
leverage parallelism
more effectively
with fewer threads.
So if you take a look at
the example I have here,
I've got an executor completion
service, which is basically
just a little wrapper around
the underlying thread pool
executor.
And this is basically
an example I've
talked about before called
the search task gang, which
uses the executor completion
service and a cached thread
pool in order to be
able to search for words
in a bunch of input strings.
We will then go
ahead and queue up
asynchronous computations
for execution
in the cached thread pool.
And we do that by
submitting a task.
As you can see here, we're
going to submit the search
for word task, which we're
going to pass in here basically
as a lambda expression.
The cool thing about futures
and the underlying thread
pool used by the executor
completion service
is that it automatically
tunes the number of threads.
So those threads
will increase as--
the threads will be increased
as the work shows up
to process them.
And of course, that will then be
run on the underlying processor
cores.
Now the way the executor
completion service works
is as the asynchronous
computations complete,
they're actually not delivered
to the user directly.
Instead they're stuck onto
something called a completion
queue.
So the completion queue
ends up with a queue
of completed futures.
And you as a client of the
executor completion service
can call the take method
on the completion service.
And that will block if
there's no futures completed.
But if there is a
completed future,
it will return the
completed future.
And then you can call get
on the completed future.
And that will always
return right away
because it wouldn't have had
a completed future show up
in the completion queue
unless it was done.
Now the other thing that's
kind of interesting about Java
futures is you can
block until the results
of asynchronous two-way
tasks are available.
We saw the example here before
where you can call a get
or the time to get.
You can either do
the blocking get
or you can do the
time or pulling get.
You can also do some
other things to features.
You can check to
see if they're done.
You can check to see
if they're cancelled.
You can cancel them.
So those are all the different
operations you can do.
However, there is a number of
problems with Java futures.
The main problems
stem from the fact
that they have a very
limited feature set.
Here are some things
they can't do.
You can't complete
them explicitly.
You need to use other
mechanisms in conjunction
with futures like future tasks.
You can't chain them
together fluently.
You have no way of
being able to start
an asynchronous operation,
indicate an action you want run
when that asynchronous operation
completes, and then chain that
together with other
asynchronous operations
that you want to happen after
the other future completes.
So as a consequence, it
makes for a very convoluted
and awkward programming model.
You can't use fluent
interfaces with futures.
You also can't trigger
them reactively.
You have to use either wait,
or a timed wait, or a poll.
You can't just say call
me back when you're done.
Instead you have to
say I want the result
or I want the result
in this amount of time.
As a general rule, if you find
yourself trying to work around
this problem by putting
timeouts on your calls to get,
that's almost always
the wrong thing to do.
It just shows there's something
broken with your program.
And yet another problem
with classic futures
is you can't treat them
efficiently as a collection.
So in particular,
you can't start up
a bunch of asynchronous
computations and then say,
I want all these things
to get called back
and tell me when
they're all done.
Instead you have to wait for
them in a particular order.
So you can see here if
we start off future one,
and we start off
future two, and we
have them running
asynchronously,
we have to dictate the order
in which the results come back.
We have to say futureone.get,
futuretwo.get, of futuretwo.get
by futureone.get.
We can't just say I want
to wait for whichever
one comes back first.
So that turns out to be
limited and frustrating.
So as a general
rule, it's extremely
awkward and inefficient to
compose multiple futures
together.
It's kind of like trying to
fit pieces of a puzzle together
that just don't
really fit together.
Now this is all
very frustrating.
And the people who
developed Java futures back
15 or so years ago back
in 2004, or whenever
you're watching this video--
back in 2004 a long time ago,
they realized there were
limitations with Java futures.
And that, of course,
is what motivated
them to fix these problems by
defining the computable futures
framework.